# Question Paper : [June-2023](https://webservices.ignou.ac.in/pre-question/Question%20Paper%20June%202023/SOCIS/MCA_NEW/MCS-211.pdf)

**Course Code:** [MCS-211](https://egyankosh.ac.in/handle/123456789/73651)  
**Course Title:** Design and Analysis of Algorithm  

---

## Question 1(a) What is an algorithm ? What are its desirable characteristics ?
### (Ref. : [Block-1](https://egyankosh.ac.in/bitstream/123456789/73663/3/Block-1.pdf) | [Unit-1](https://egyankosh.ac.in/bitstream/123456789/73664/4/Unit-1.pdf))
### **Answer**

#### Algorithm
An algorithm is a set of steps to solve a problem or a set of problems. Also, an algorithm is a step by step procedure to solve logical and mathematical or computational problems.

> A reciepe is a good example of algorithm. To cook a dish, a reciepe says what to be done step by step.

##### Important Characteristics of an Algorithm
1. **Input**: There must be a finite number of inputs for the algorithm.
2. **Output**: There must be some output produced as a result of execution of the algorithm.
3. **Definiteness**: There must be a definite sequence of operations for transformation of input into output.
4. **Effectiveness**: Every step of the algorithm should be basic and essential
5. **Finiteness**: The transformation of input to output must be achieved in finite steps.

##### Desirable Characteristics of an Algorithm
1. **General**: The algorithm should be general and is able to solve several cases.
2. **Efficiency**: The algorithm should use resources efficiently, i.e. takes less time and money in producing the result.
3. **Understandability**: The algorithms should be understandable and apply it to own problem.
4. **Uniqueness**: The algorithm should follow uniqueness such that instruction of the algorithm is unambiguous (synonyms : precise/absolute) and clear.

## Question 1(b) What are asymptotic notations ? Explain any *two* asymptotic notations with suitable example for each.
### (Ref. : [Block-1](https://egyankosh.ac.in/bitstream/123456789/73663/3/Block-1.pdf) | [Unit-2](https://egyankosh.ac.in/bitstream/123456789/73665/3/Unit-2.pdf))

### Answer

> To analyze the algorithms efficiency, asymptotic notations are generally used.  
> There are three popular asymptotic notations, Big O, Big Omega (Î©) and Big Theta (Î˜).  
> Big O notation is mostly used as it measure the upper bound of the complexity. On the contrary, Big Omega (Î©) measures the lower bound of time complexity, and Big Theta (Î˜) is used to measure the average time of any algorithm.

#### Asymptotic Analysis
Asymptotic analysis is a more formal method for analyzing algorithmic efficiency. It is a mathematical tool to analyze the time and space complexity of an algorithm as a function of input size. 

There are three popular asymptotic notations :
1. Big-O notation
2. Big-Î© (Omega) notation
3. Big-Î˜ (Theta) notation

##### Big-O notation
Big-O is used to measure the upper bound or worst case for time (or space) complexity of an algorithm. It ensures that the algorithm will not exceed this bound.
> Example [Status : Pending]

##### Big-Î© (Omega) notation
Big-Î© (Omega) describes the asymptotic lower bound or best case for time (or space) of an algorithm. Generally, we can say that an algorithm takes at least this amount of time without mentioning the upper bound.
> Example [Status : Pending]

##### Big-Î˜ (Theta) notation
Big-Î˜ represents the tight bound or average case for time (or space) of an algorithm. by combining the upper (ð‘‚) and lower (Î©) bounds. It describes the exact (or average) asymptotic behavior.
> Example [Status : Pending]

Asymptotic notations allow us to analyze algorithms abstractly, focusing on their scalability and efficiency for large inputs. While Big-O helps identify worst-case scenarios, Big-Omega provides the best-case analysis, and Theta gives a precise understanding of the algorithm's growth behavior.

## Question 1(c) Solve the following recurrence relation using substitution method : T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n.

## Question 1(d) Write and explain binary search algorithm with an suitable example.

## Question 1(e) Explain Depth First Search (DFS) algorithm with an suitable example.

## Question 1(f) What is Dynamic Programming approach of problem solving ? Write the steps involved in dynamic programming.

## Question 1(g) What are Optimization and Decision problems ? Give an example of each.

## Question 1(h) Design a state space tree for the given subset sum problem. S = {4, 6, 7, 8}, W = 8.