# Question Paper : [June-2024](https://webservices.ignou.ac.in/pre-question/Question%20Paper%20June%202024/SOCIS/MCA_NEW/MCS-211.pdf)

**Course Code:** [MCS-211](https://egyankosh.ac.in/handle/123456789/73651)  
**Course Title:** Design and Analysis of Algorithm  

---

## Question 1(a) Use mathematical induction to prove that : 1<sup>2</sup>+2<sup>2</sup>+...+n<sup>2</sup> = (n(n+1)(2n+1))/6

## Question 1(b) Write recursive binary search algorithms and analyse its complexity in worst case scenario.

## Question 1(c) What is an algorithm ? Explain characteristics of an algorithm with the help of an example.
### (Ref. : [Block-1](https://egyankosh.ac.in/bitstream/123456789/73663/3/Block-1.pdf) | [Unit-1](https://egyankosh.ac.in/bitstream/123456789/73664/4/Unit-1.pdf))

### **Answer**

#### Algorithm
An algorithm is a set of steps to solve a problem or a set of problems. Also, an algorithm is a step by step procedure to solve logical and mathematical or computational problems.

> A reciepe is a good example of algorithm. To cook a dish, a reciepe says what to be done step by step.

##### Important Characteristics of an Algorithm
1. **Input**: There must be a finite number of inputs for the algorithm.
2. **Output**: There must be some output produced as a result of execution of the algorithm.
3. **Definiteness**: There must be a definite sequence of operations for transformation of input into output.
4. **Effectiveness**: Every step of the algorithm should be basic and essential
5. **Finiteness**: The transformation of input to output must be achieved in finite steps.

##### Desirable Characteristics of an Algorithm
1. **General**: The algorithm should be general and is able to solve several cases.
2. **Efficiency**: The algorithm should use resources efficiently, i.e. takes less time and money in producing the result.
3. **Understandability**: The algorithms should be understandable and apply it to own problem.
4. **Uniqueness**: The algorithm should follow uniqueness such that instruction of the algorithm is unambiguous (synonyms : precise/absolute) and clear.

> Example [Status : Pending]

## Question 1(d) Multiply the following two matrix using Strassen’s algorithm : (refer to ques. paper for matix)

## Question 1(e) What are P and NP class of problems ? Differentiate between NP-Hard and NPComplete problems.

## Question 1(f) Explain quick sort algorithm using suitable example.

## Question 1(g) Multiply the following two numbers using Karatsuba’s algorithm.

## Question 1(h) What is string matching algorithm ? Derive its best case time complexity